Hi, I'm Carrie Anne and welcome to Crash Course Computer Science.

Early in this series we covered computing history from roughly the dawn of civilization,

up to the birth of electronic general purpose computers in the mid 1940s.

A lot of the material we've discussed over the past 23 episodes

like programming languages and compilers

algorithms and integrated circuits

Floppy disks and operating systems, telly types and screens

all emerged over roughly a 30-year period, from the mid 1940s up to the mid 1970s

This is the era of computing before companies like Apple and Microsoft existed

and long before anyone tweeted, Googled or Uber-d.

It was a formative period setting the stage for personal computers,

worldwide web, self-driving cars virtual reality, and many other topics

we'll get to in the second half of this series.

Today we're going to step back from circuits and algorithms and review this influential period.

We'll pay special attention to the historical backdrop of the cold war, the space race and the rise of globalization and consumerism.

Pretty much immediately after World War II concluded in 1945,

there was tension between the world's two new superpowers the United States and the USSR

The Cold War had begun and with it, massive government spending on science and engineering.

Computing which had already demonstrated its value in wartime efforts like the Manhattan Project

and code breaking Nazi communications,

was lavished with government funding. They enabled huge ambitious computing projects to be undertaken,

like ENIAC, EDVAC, Atlas and Whirlwind all mentioned in previous episodes.

This spurred rapid advances that simply weren't possible in the commercial sector alone,

where projects were generally expected to recoup development costs through sales.

This began to change in the early 1950s, especially with Eckert and Buckley's Univac 1,

the first commercially successful computer.

Unlike any Echo Atlas, this wasn't just one single computer.

It was a model of computers, in total more than 40 were built.

Most of these Univacs went to government offices or large companies.

Which was part of the growing military industrial complex in the United States, with pockets deep enough to afford the cutting edge.

Famously a Univac one built for the U.S atomic energy commission was used by CBS to predict the results of

the 1952 U.S. presidential election. With just 1% of the vote the computer correctly predicted an Eisenhower landslide while pundits favored Stevenson.

It was a media event that helped propel computing to the forefront of the public's imagination

Computing was unlike machines of the past, which generally augmented human physical abilities.

Trucks allowed us to carry more automatic looms whoa faster

Machine tools were more precise and so on for a bunch of contraptions that typify the industrial revolution.

But computers on the other hand could augment human intellect.

This potential wasn't lost on Vannevar Bush, who in 1945 published an article

on a hypothetical computing device he envisioned called the Memex.

This was a device in which an individual stores all his books, records and communications

and which is mechanized, so it may be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility

It is an enlarged intimate supplement to his memory.

He also predicted that wholly new forms of encyclopedia will appear,

ready-made, with a mesh of associative trails running through them. Sound familiar?

Memex directly inspired several subsequent game-changing systems,

like Ivan Sutherland Sketchpad, which we discussed last episode,

and Dough Engelbart's online system, which we will cover soon.

Vannevar Bush was the head of the U.S. office of Scientific Research and Development,

which was responsible for funding and coordinating scientific research during World War Two.

With the Cold War brewing, Bush lobbied for a creation of a peace time equivalent,

the National Science Foundation, formed in 1950.

To this day the NSF provides federal funding to support scientific research in the United States.

And it is a major reason the U.S. has continued to be a leader in the technology sector.

It was also in the 1950s that consumers started to buy transistor powered gadgets,

notable among them was the transistor radio, which was small, durable and battery-powered.

And it was portable, unlike the vacuum tube based radio sets from the 1940s and before.

It was a runaway success, the furby or iphone of its day.

The Japanese government looking for industrial opportunities, to bolster their post-war economy,

soon got in on the action. Licensing the rights to Transistors from Bell Labs in 1952.

Helping launch the Japanese semiconductor and electronics industry.

In 1955, the first Sony product was released:

The TR-55 Transistor Radio. Concentrating on quality and price,

Japanese companies captured half of the U.S. Market for portable radios in just five years.

This planted the first seeds of a major industrial rivalry in the decades to come.

In 1953, there were only around 100 computers on the entire planet

and at this point, the USSR was only a few years behind the West in computing technology,

completing their first programmable electronic computer in 1950.

But the Soviets were way ahead in the burgeoning space race. Let's go to the thought-bubble.

The Soviets launched the world's first satellite into orbit, Sputnik one,

in 1957 and a few years later in 1961.

Soviet Cosmonaut, Yuri Gagarin became the first human in space.

This didn't sit well with the American public

and prompted President Kennedy, a month after Gagarin's mission,

to encourage the nation to land a man on the moon within the decade. And it was expensive!

Nasa's budget grew almost tenfold, peaking in 1966 at roughly 4.5 percent of the u.s. Federal budget today

It's around half a percent

Nasa used this funding to tackle a huge array of enormous challenges this culminated in the apollo program

Which is peak employed roughly?

400,000 people further supported by over 20,000 universities and companies one of these huge challenges was navigating in space

Nasa needed a computer to process complex trajectories and issue Guidance commands to the spacecraft for this they built the apollo guidance computer

There were three significant requirements first the computer had to be fast no surprise there second it has to be small and lightweight

there's not a lot of room in a spacecraft and every ounce is precious when you're flying a quarter million miles to the moon and

Finally it had to be really really ridiculously reliable

This is super important in a spacecraft where there's lots of vibration radiation and temperature change

And there's no running to best buy it something breaks the technology of the era of vacuum Tubes and discrete transistors

Just weren't up to the task so Nasa turned to a brand-new technology integrated circuits

Which we discussed a few episodes ago the apollo guidance computer was the first computer to use them a huge paradigm shift

Nasa was also the only place that could afford them initially each chip cost around $50 and the guidance computer needed thousands of them

But by paying that price the Americans were able to beat the soviets to the moon

Thanks, thought-bubble although the apollo Guidance computer is credited with spurring the development and adoption of integrated circuits

It was a low volume product there are only 17 apollo missions after all it was actually military applications

Especially the minuteman and polaris nuclear missile systems that allowed integrated circuits to become a mass-produced

Item this rapid Advancement was further accelerated by the u.s.

Building and buying huge powerful computers often called supercomputers because they were frequently 10 times faster than any other computer on the planet

Upon their release but these machines built by companies Like CDC cray

And Ibm were also super in cost and pretty much only governments could afford to buy them in the us these machines went to government

Agencies like the NSA and government research labs like Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos National laboratories initially the u.s.

semiconductor industry boomed buoyed by High profit government contracts

However this meant that most us companies overlooked the consumer market where profit Margins were small the Japanese

Semiconductor industry came to dominate this niche by having to operate with lean profit margins in the 1950s and 60s

the Japanese had invested heavily in manufacturing capacity to achieve economies of scale in

Research to improve quality and Yields and in automation to keep manufacturing costs low in the 1970s with the space Race and cold war subsiding

previously juicy defense contracts began to dry up and

Consumer conductor and electronics companies found it harder to compete it didn't help the many computing components had been commoditized

Be around with Dram

So why buy expensive intel memory when you could buy the same chip for less from Hitachi?

Throughout the 1970s us companies began to downsize consolidate or outright fail intel had to lay off a third of its Workforce in

1974 and even the storied Fairchild semiconductor was acquired in

1979 after near bankruptcy to survive many of these companies began to outsource their manufacturing in a bid to reduce costs

Intel weave drew from its main product category memory Ics and decided to refocus on processes

Which ultimately saved the company this low and us?

electronics industry allowed Japanese companies like Sharp and Casio to dominate the Breakout computing product of the

1970s Handheld electronic calculators by using integrated circuits these could be made small and cheap they replaced

Expensive desktop adding machines you find in offices

For most people it was the first time they didn't have to do math on paper, or use a slide rule

They were an instant hit selling by the millions

This server drove down the cost of integrated circuits and led to the development and widespread use of micro processors like the intel

4004 we've discussed previously

This chip was built by intel in 1971 at the request of Japanese calculator company busy calm soon

Japanese electronics were everywhere from televisions of VcRs to digital wristwatches and Walkmans the availability of inexpensive

microprocessor Spawned in Highly new Products like video arcades the world got pong in 1972 and Breakout in

1976 as cost continued to plummet soon it became possible for regular people to afford computing devices during this time

we see the emergence of the first successful home computers like the

1975 Altair 8800 and also the first home gaming consoles like the Atari 2600 in

1977 home now, I repeat that home that seems like a small thing today

But this was the dawn of a whole new era in computing in just three decades computers have evolved from machines where you could literally?

Walk inside of the cPU assuming you had government clearance to the point where a child could play with a handheld toy

Containing a microprocessor many times faster, critically this dramatic evolution would have been but without two powerful forces at play

governments and consumers

government funding like the United States provided during the cold war

enabled early adoption of many nascent computing technologies this funding helped flow entire

Industries relate into computing long enough for the technology to mature and become commercially feasible then businesses and ultimately consumers

Provided the demand to take it mainstream the cold war may be over, but this relationship continues today

Governments are still funding science research intelligence agencies are still buying supercomputers humans are still being launched into space

And you're still buying TVs xboxes playstations laptops and smartphones and for these reasons

Computing continues to Advance a lightning pace. I'll see you next week

crash course computer science is produced in association with PBS digital studios

At their channel you can check out a playlist of shows like Physics Goldie flicks

And PBs space time this episode was filmed at the Chad and stacey ever thought studio in Indianapolis, Indiana

And it was made with the help of all these nice people and our wonderful graphic scene thought cafe

That's where we're going to have to halt and catch fire. See you next week

you

